chore (doc):  maintaining a plugin guide. (#21221)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/maintaining-a-plugin.md

---
title: Maintaining a Plugin
---

> The Gatsby community thrives on the power of plugins, you often find that there is a plugin for almost everything ranging from source plugins, to transformer plugins, to plugins that are plugins for other plugin. There is a guide on the [naming conventions for plugins](/docs/naming-a-plugin/), check it out to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Gatsby community thrives on the power of plugins. You often find that there is a plugin for almost everything ranging from source plugins to transformer plugins. A useful way of understanding the purpose of a plugin at a glance is by its name. Check out the [guide to naming conventions for plugins](/docs/naming-a-plugin/) to learn more.
```

> The Gatsby community thrives on the power of plugins, you often find that there is a plugin for almost everything ranging from source plugins, to transformer plugins, to plugins that are plugins for other plugin. There is a guide on the [naming conventions for plugins](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/naming-a-plugin/), check it out to learn more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Gatsby community thrives on the power of plugins, you often find that there is a plugin for almost everything ranging from source plugins, to transformer plugins, to plugins that are plugins for other plugin. There is a guide on the [naming conventions for plugins](/docs/naming-a-plugin/), check it out to learn more.
```

Missed this relative link in the first pass, woops

> The Gatsby community thrives on the power of plugins, you often find that there is a plugin for almost everything ranging from source plugins to transformer plugins to plugins that are plugins for other plugin . There is a guide to for the [naming convention for plugins](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/naming-a-plugin/) check it out to learn more .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Gatsby community thrives on the power of plugins, you often find that there is a plugin for almost everything ranging from source plugins, to transformer plugins, to plugins that are plugins for other plugin. There is a guide on the [naming conventions for plugins](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/naming-a-plugin/), check it out to learn more.
```

> > Wondering how to [create a plugin](/docs/creating-plugins) Look no further. Start contributing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Wondering how to [create a plugin](/docs/creating-plugins)? Look no further. Start contributing.
```

> > Wondering how to [Create a plugin](/docs/creating-plugins) Look no further. Start contributing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Wondering how to [create a plugin](/docs/creating-plugins) Look no further. Start contributing.
```

This could be lowercased

> > Wondering how to [Creating a plugin](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/creating-plugins/) ? Look no further . Start contributing .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Wondering how to [create a plugin](/docs/creating-plugins/)? Look no further. Start contributing.
```

Inside docs we can use relative links (`/docs/creating-plugins/` instead of `https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/creating-plugins/`), which utilize the Gatsby Link component 🙂

> ## What is a Plugin ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What is a plugin?
```

This is a small little thing from the style guide, in subtitles `##`, or `###`, etc, we generally only capitalize the first word: https://www.gatsbyjs.org/contributing/gatsby-style-guide/#format-titles-and-headers

> Gatsby plugins are Node.js packages that implement Gatsby APIs. [Learn more about plugins](/docs/plugins/)in this part of the Gatsby documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gatsby plugins are Node.js packages that implement Gatsby APIs. To learn more take a look at the [plugin documentation](/docs/plugins/).
```

> Gatsby plugins are Node.js packages that implement Gatsby APIs. [Learn more about Plugins](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/plugins/) in this part of the Gatsby documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gatsby plugins are Node.js packages that implement Gatsby APIs. [Learn more about plugins](/docs/plugins/) in this part of the Gatsby documentation.
```

same note on relative links 🙂

> The bulk of the work is during the development phase. However, there’s still a need to take a look at the dependencies and security features from time to time. Keeping Plugins up to date becomes really tasking and it is important to be careful when updating dependencies seeing as this could potentially break your apps.

Reviewer: The bulk of what work? If we're talking about updating plugins we'll want to re-introduce that topic.

> The bulk of the work is during the development phase. However, there’s still a need to take a look at the dependencies and security features from time to time. Keeping Plugins up to date becomes really tasking and can sometimes become really complicated since updating dependencies could potentially break your apps.

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is a question for someone else, but I think calling things tasking and complicated makes this sound a little scary, perhaps there's another way to convey the importance and explain things can break without  them up to be afraid of it? Maybe something like:

```
Be careful because updating dependencies could potentially break your apps.
```

🤷‍♂

Author: Oh, I get that. I will try to reconstruct that bit.

> However, the effects of not updating and maintaining can bring a huge security issue to your apps that you don't want . Let's look at some tips to apply when maintaining plugins:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the consequences of not updating and maintaining a plugin can introduce security issues to your apps. The following are some recommendations for maintaining plugins:
```
It's a bit round about but "let's" = let us which is using "we" instead of "you". So I recommend rephrasing it a bit to adhere to style guide tone :)

> However, the effects of not updating and maintaining can bring a huge security issue to your apps and we don't want that. Let's look at some tips to apply when maintaining plugins:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the effects of not updating and maintaining can bring a huge security issue to your apps that you don't want. Let's look at some tips to apply when maintaining plugins:
```

## Handling patches and improvements

Most plugins generally follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/) to determine how many releases to do and the type of releases.

> The first public release of a plugin is 0.1.0 or 1.0.0. From there, bugs are fixed in patch releases (e.g. 0.1.1) features are added or changed in minor releases (e.g. 0.2.0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first public release of a plugin is 0.1.0 or 1.0.0. From there, bugs are fixed in patch releases (e.g. 0.1.1) and features are added or changed in minor releases (e.g. 0.2.0).
```

Version 1.0.0 should be released when the plugin's API is considered stable. Version 2.0.0 (and subsequent major releases) would introduce breaking API changes.

> > Consider a version format of X.Y.Z (Major.Minor.Patch). Bug fixes not affecting the API increment the patch version, backwards compatible API additions/changes increment the minor version, and backwards incompatible API changes increment the major version.

Reviewer: Is this note pulled from elsewhere? We should source it if so.

> ## Update READMe and document use cases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Update README and document use cases
```

> ## Update ReadMe and Use cases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Update README and document use cases 
```

> Every major version update should also be reflected in the README of the plugin and also in the use case examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every major version update should also be reflected in the README of the plugin as well as the use case examples.
```

> Every major version update should also be reflexed in the READme of the Plugin and also in the use case examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every major version update should also be reflected in the README of the plugin and also in the use case examples.
```

This looks like it might have been a typo 🙂

> It would be great for users to be able to reference several versions of the plugin with the updated examples to see if they want to keep the current version or upgrade and also to understand what the new version offers. Although this is good:

Reviewer: It would be helpful to be more concrete here. These are our recommendations so feel free to tell them exactly what you'd like them to do.

Reviewer 2: What do you think about this @Ekwuno? Would this be something else we could add here?

> It would be great for users to be able reference several versions of the plugin with the updated examples to see if they want to keep the current version or upgrade and also to understand what the new version offers. Although this is good:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It would be great for users to be able to reference several versions of the plugin with the updated examples to see if they want to keep the current version or upgrade and also to understand what the new version offers. Although this is good:
```

- Try to not clog your release repository with older versions of the plugin as you update, as they’re not often needed. Instead, simply keep the last few in place.

- Try not to push every iterative change from Git live

## Tools for dependency version maintenance

> There are a couple of useful tools that can help out with keeping dependences up to date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a couple of useful tools that can help with keeping dependencies up to date.
```

> Keeping Plugins up to date becomes really tasking and can sometimes it can become really complicated since updating dependencies could potentially break your apps. There are a couple of useful tools that can help out.

Reviewer 2: This looks like the chunk above, maybe what's reworked there could be updated here too?

> 1. [Version Lens](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=pflannery.vscode-versionlens) enables you to update your dependencies from your `package.json` by allowing you see the exact numbers right above each package in dependencies or devDependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Version Lens](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=pflannery.vscode-versionlens) enables you to update your dependencies from your `package.json` by allowing you see the exact numbers right above each package in dependencies or devDependencies.
```
By exact numbers do we mean current version numbers?

Author: Yes, I will replace that with "a version number" to be clearer

> 2. The [npm check updates](https://www.npmjs.com/package/npm-check-updates) command line tool helps to check for outdated dependencies and updating in theses steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The [npm check updates](https://www.npmjs.com/package/npm-check-updates) command line tool helps to check for outdated dependencies. You can also use this tool to update those dependencies by following these steps: 
```

> - install by running `npm i -g npm-check-updates`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Install the tool
 ```shell
 npm i -g npm-check-updates```
```

> - Running `ncu -u`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Run the command to update dependencies
 ```shell
 ncu -u```
```

> ## Community supporting content and feedback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Community supporting content and feedback
```

> A lot of use cases for using the created plugin would be a great way to get users to have knowledge on implementations. Also creating forums where users of your plugins have a way to get answers to questions and help with issues, whether that’s from you or from other community members.

Reviewer: Not understanding what we're recommending here. I think we're telling them to have example repos and support lines? I think we could be clearer.

---
title: Maintaining a Plugin
---

The Gatsby community thrives on the power of plugins. You often find that there is a plugin for almost everything ranging from source plugins to transformer plugins. A useful way of understanding the purpose of a plugin at a glance is by its name. Check out the [guide to naming conventions for plugins](/docs/naming-a-plugin/) to learn more.

> Wondering how to [create a plugin](/docs/creating-plugins)? Look no further. Start contributing.

## What is a plugin?

Gatsby plugins are Node.js packages that implement Gatsby APIs. To learn more take a look at the [plugin documentation](/docs/plugins/).

> In creating plugins, the bulk of the work is during the development phase. However, there’s still a need to take a look at the dependencies and security features from time to time. Keeping Plugins up to date becomes really tasking and it is important to be careful when updating dependencies seeing as this could potentially break your apps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In creating plugins, the bulk of the work is during the development phase. However, there’s still a need to take a look at the dependencies and security features from time to time. Keeping plugins up to date can become really tasking and it is important to be careful when updating dependencies, seeing as this could potentially break users' apps.
```
It would be good to focus on the end user of the plugins to motivate why they'd want to update.

> However, the consequences of not updating and maintaining a plugin can introduce security issues to your apps. The following are some recommendations for maintaining plugins:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, the consequences of not updating and maintaining a plugin can introduce security issues to your users. The following are some recommendations for maintaining plugins:
```

> Consider a version format of X.Y.Z (Major.Minor.Patch). Bug fixes not affecting the API increment the patch version, backwards compatible API additions/changes increment the minor version, and backwards incompatible API changes increment the major version.

Read more about this concept [in this paper on semantic versioning ](https://semver.org/).

## Update README and document use cases

Every major version update should also be reflected in the README of the plugin as well as the use case examples.

It would be great for users to be able to reference several versions of the plugin with the updated examples to see if they want to keep the current version or upgrade and also to understand what the new version offers. Although this is good:

- Try to not clog your release repository with older versions of the plugin as you update, as they’re not often needed. Instead, simply keep the last few in place.

- Try not to push every iterative change from Git live

## Tools for dependency version maintenance

There are a couple of useful tools that can help with keeping dependencies up to date.

> 1. [Version Lens](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=pflannery.vscode-versionlens) enables you to update your dependencies from your `package.json` by allowing you see the available version number the package can be updated to, right above the current version each package in dependencies or devDependencies uses.

Reviewer 3: Should this item be part of the numbered list? It seems like maybe the numbering could be limited to the npm check updates steps. The numbers below are also a little off.

2. The [npm check updates](https://www.npmjs.com/package/npm-check-updates) command line tool helps to check for outdated dependencies. You can also use this tool to update those dependencies by following these steps:

3. Install the tool

```shell
 npm i -g npm-check-updates
```

2.  Run the command to update dependencies

```shell
ncu -u
```

## Community supporting content and feedback

> Having example repos and support forums on Discord, Twitter or Reddit is a great was to offer community support for your plugin. This would offer a pool of resources for users to get more information on implementations and contribute.

Reviewer 3: I wish the Typobot had caught "was" here! I wonder if there's a bot that also checks spelling _and_ grammar 🤔 
```suggestion
Having example repos and support forums on Discord, Twitter or Reddit are great ways to offer community support for your plugin. This would offer a pool of resources for users to get more information on implementations and contribute.
```
